Docs: Update images in Symbiosis (#388)
rsksmart/devportal: tutorials/ethereum-devs/truffle-test.md

---
layout: rsk
title: Testing smart contracts using Truffle
tags: tutorial, rsk, truffle, test
description: "How to create and run tests on your RSK smart contracts using Truffle."
render_features: "custom-terminals"
---

> In this tutorial, I will show you step-by-step how create and run tests in smart contracts using Truffle framework connected to a RSK local node.

Author: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, I will show you step-by-step how to create and run tests in smart contracts using Truffle framework connected to an RSK local node.
```

# Overview

Here is a summary of the steps to be taken:

1. Installation requirements;
2. Run a RSK local node (regtest);
3. Create the Register project;
4. Configure Truffle framework;
5. Create a smart contract;
6. Compile;

> 7. Testing without deploy;

Author: Testing without deploying?

Reviewer: Yes, it is possible :)

8. Deploy on RSK local node;
9. Testing a deployed smart contract; 

## Translations

This article is also available in
[Português](https://solange.dev/2020/rsk-truffle-tests/ "Testando smart contracts utilizando Truffle na rede RSK").

# Requirements

1. POSIX compliant shell
2. Java
3. Editor: Visual Studio Code (VSCode) ou outro editor de sua escolha
4. Truffle

All requirements are explained in detail in the tutorial link below:

* [Setup a project with Truffle and OpenZeppelin](/tutorials/ethereum-devs/setup-truffle-oz/)

# RSK Local node - regtest

When we develop a project using Truffle Framework, we need a blockchain node running locally. This is better for development, and running tests. We'll run a local node, also known as regtest.

> There are several ways to set up a RSK local node. To know how to download a JAR file and run it using the Java SDK, look the tutorial: 

Author: ```suggestion
There are several ways to set up an RSK local node. To know how to download a JAR file and run it using the Java SDK, check out the tutorial: 
```

**Important:**

> Do not close this terminal/console window,
> if closed the local node will stop running.

# Create the register project

1. Create a new folder named `Register`, and navigate to the folder in the terminal;
2. Initialize an empty Truffle project;
3. Initialize an npm project

```shell
mkdir Register
cd Register
truffle init
npm init -y
```

If you would like more details about this step, you can see the tutorial previously mentioned:

* [Setup a project with Truffle and OpenZeppelin](/tutorials/ethereum-devs/setup-truffle-oz/)

Open the project in VS Code.

```shell
code .
```

# Configure Truffle to connect to RSK local node

Open `truffle-config.js` file in your Truffle project and overwrite it with the following code:

```javascript
module.exports = {
  networks: {
    development: {
      host: "127.0.0.1",
      port: 4444,
      network_id: "*"
    },
  },
  compilers: {
    solc: {
      version: "0.5.16",
    }
  }
}
```

Check out the VS Code image:

![truffle-config](/assets/img/tutorials/truffle-test/image-04.png)

# Smart contract

In your terminal, inside the project folder, run this command:

```shell
truffle create contract Register
```

> This command creates a smart contract 'skeleton'. See the result in the `contracts` folder:

Author: ```suggestion
This command creates a 'skeleton' smart contract. See the results in the `contracts` folder:
```

![truffle create contract Register](/assets/img/tutorials/truffle-test/image-05.png)

Overwrite it with the following code:

```javascript
pragma solidity 0.5.16;

contract Register {
    string private info;

    function setInfo(string memory _info) public {
        info = _info;
    }

    function getInfo() public view returns (string memory) {
        return info;
    }
}
```

Check out the VS Code image:

![VS Code Register.sol](/assets/img/tutorials/truffle-test/image-06.png)

## Register.sol

This smart contract has:

* A variable `info` to store a string
* A function `getInfo()` to return the string stored at variable info
* A function `setInfo()` to change the string stored at variable info

# Compile the smart contract

Run this command in the terminal:

```
truffle compile
```

```windows-command-prompt
C:\RSK\Register>truffle compile

Compiling your contracts...
===========================
> Compiling .\contracts\Migrations.sol
> Compiling .\contracts\Register.sol
> Artifacts written to C:\RSK\Register\build\contracts
> Compiled successfully using:
   - solc: 0.5.16+commit.9c3226ce.Emscripten.clang

C:\RSK\Register>
```

> # Testing without deploy

Author: ```suggestion
# Testing without deployment
```

It is possible to test a smart contract which is not published in any network yet.

In the `test` folder, create a file named `register_new.js`

Copy and paste this source code:

```javascript
const Register = artifacts.require('Register');
 
contract('Test new Register', (accounts) => {
  it('should store an information', async () => {
    const RegisterInstance = await Register.new();
    // Set information "RSK"
    await RegisterInstance.setInfo("RSK", { from: accounts[0] });
    // Get information value
    const storedData = await RegisterInstance.getInfo();
    assert.equal(storedData, "RSK", 'The information RSK was not stored.');
  });
});
```

Check out the VS Code image:

![VSCode register_new](/assets/img/tutorials/truffle-test/image-08.png)

> To do tests in a smart contract which is not published in any network, use `.new()`. It will create a new smart contract instance for run the tests.

## Running tests

In the terminal, run this command:

```
truffle test
```

> Look the result:

Author: ```suggestion
Check out the result:
```

![truffle test](/assets/img/tutorials/truffle-test/image-09.png)

Our test passed :)

# Deploy on RSK local node

> First of all, we need to create a file in Truffle structure with instructions to deploy the smart contract.

Author: ```suggestion
Firstly, we need to create a file in the Truffle structure with instructions to deploy the smart contract.
```

## Create file 2_deploy_contracts.js

> Folder `migrations` has JavaScript files that help you deploy contracts to the network.

Author: ```suggestion
The `migrations` folder has JavaScript files that help you deploy contracts to the network.
```

   > Total cost:          0.00376838 ETH
```

And then it deploys our smart contract `Register.sol`:

```windows-command-prompt
2_deploy_contracts.js
=====================

   Deploying 'Register'
   --------------------
   > transaction hash:    0xa25ba50d5831e49c4e3e2a42bc1b3a92158ca57e30a8a72e171b3a3bfa35e7e4
   > Blocks: 0            Seconds: 0
   > contract address:    0xD156852128F3625d816F2d4257c0e961B1a0a33a
   > block number:        179472
   > block timestamp:     1593741545
   > account:             0xCD2a3d9F938E13CD947Ec05AbC7FE734Df8DD826
   > balance:             999999999999.41858098
   > gas used:            262150 (0x40006)
   > gas price:           20 gwei
   > value sent:          0 ETH
   > total cost:          0.005243 ETH

   > Saving migration to chain.
   > Saving artifacts
   -------------------------------------
   > Total cost:            0.005243 ETH

Summary
=======
> Total deployments:   2
> Final cost:          0.00901138 ETH
```

# Testing a deployed smart contract

Let's create a new test file for the published smart contract.

In the terminal, inside the project folder, run this command:

```shell
truffle create test Register
```

> This command creates in the folder `test` a file for the smart contract `Register`, with a test that checks whether the published smart contract can be instantiated.

Author: ```suggestion
This command creates a `test` file in the smart contract `Register` folder, with a test that checks whether the published smart contract can be instantiated.
```

Reviewer: This command creates a `test` file in the smart contract `Register` folder
If I read this, I will understand that the file will be create in the "smart contract `Register` folder".
It is not true.
The smart contract `Register` is in the folder `contract`.
The test will be created in the folder `test`.
And the test is based in the  smart contract `Register`.

How is the best form to write this?

Author: This command creates a `test` file in the `test’ folder, which is located in the `Register’ folder in `Contracts’. This test checks whether the published smart contract can be instantiated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command creates a `test` file, related to the smart contract `Register`, in the `test’ folder. This file has a test that checks whether the published smart contract can be instantiated.
```

Check out the VS Code image:

![truffle create test Register](/assets/img/tutorials/truffle-test/image-14.png)

Let's replace the file with the instructions to execute the same tests we did before, but now for the `deployed` smart contract: 

```javascript
const Register = artifacts.require('Register');
 
contract('Test deployed Register', (accounts) => {
  it('should store an information', async () => {
    const RegisterInstance = await Register.deployed();
    // Set information "RSK"
    await RegisterInstance.setInfo("RSK", { from: accounts[0] });
    // Get information value
    const storedData = await RegisterInstance.getInfo();
    assert.equal(storedData, "RSK", 'The information RSK was not stored.');
  });
});
```

![Test deployed Register](/assets/img/tutorials/truffle-test/image-15.png)

## Running the test

The `truffle test` command performs tests on all files found in the` test` directory.
Now we have 2 files with tests.
To run tests on only one file, specify the name in the `test` directory.

We will run the tests of the `register.js` file. In the terminal, execute this command:

```
truffle test test/register.js
```

> Look the result:

Author: ```suggestion
Check out the result:
```
